## Calling for a Raid

So your best friend just fucked your loli sister? Your ex just posted
sex pics on the web? Maybe there's a forum that's pissing you off. Some
pissant idiot is outting you on your
[JB](http://web.archive.org/web/20080220162414/http://wikichan.org/index.php/JB "JB")
"fetish" on his blog.

They fucked up. They might just get raided.

### Calling for a raid on a person

Get their information. Address, Phone number, email, name. Go to 4chan's
/b/ around 10pm EST, and post it.

Give a small amount of information as to why they pissed you off.
Otherwise /b/ will **NOT YOUR PERSONAL ARMY** you to death. It is going
to happen anyway, of course. There will be newfags who will claim that
/b/ is not your personal army. This is untrue; Anonymous is Anonymous,
/b/ is /b/, we are all one. We play ball with other anonymous.

So just keep in mind; for every person who claims NYPA, there are three
people who will attack your target. There will also be at least one uber
newfag. This person will contact your target, and give them as much
information about you as they can.

This is an example of not enough information to give:

*hey /b/. This person pissed me off. Please fuck him over. abc@xyz.com
1234 Anon Dr. Washington DC, USA (800)588-2300* \
Anonymous's response\
 */b/ IS NOT YOUR PERSONAL ARMY GTFO OFF MY INTERNETS"*

This is an example of too much.

*Hey /b/. The principal at my highschool just gave me three days
detention for putting a note in my girlfriend's locker. It was announced
over the PA system, even. [Information on faggot principal.] Send him
horse porn, send him pizza, make him change his phone number, etc.
**USER WAS BANNED FOR THIS POST UNDERAGE B&**.* \
Anonymous's response\
 *Dear [Principal's name, <principal's email address\>]. A student of
yours is calling for a raid on your personal self. This particular
student recieved three days of detention for putting a note in his
girlfriend's locker. I'm sure you know the student. The raid that is
about to fall on you is solely his responsibility.*

Anonymous just fucked you over by supplying your identity to your
principal. You are now royally screwed. Unfortunately, because the
reason for the raid is so good, the person in question will get
destroyed. He will be *sure* to want to know who is responsible. And you
will probbaly get arrested when 140 pizzas show up at your principals
house. Too much information â‰  good.

The right amount of information is somewhere inbetween. Honestly, it
depends on the situation. When you call for the raid, you have to think;
is your number one priority not getting caught, or fucking the person
over?