For some magical reason yet unknown to us, you will eventually have to
quit you McJob and start making some money. Chances are you're already
on a first name basis with drugs seeing as how you're scraping grease
traps instead of using that college degree for something other than a
napkin.

## Getting your supply

Drug dealing comes in two main flavors; recreational drug dealing and
pharmaceutical drug dealing. Don't worry, there's money to be made with
both.

Acquiring recreational drugs (weed, coke, meth, ether) is easier because
of the large black market that has developed in most of the world. You
can either buy from a middle man (at a higher price), or you can try to
find someone who imports or makes the stuff (which may be cheaper but
ties you with certain obligations).

Acquiring pharmaceutical drugs (Ritalin, Zooloft, Amyl Nitrate) is
harder because although there are plenty of pharmacies around, you need
prescriptions to be able to buy them. You can either befriend a doctor
or shrink and get them to write you bogus prescriptions but this doesn't
always work and requires some charisma, of which most Anon are lacking.
OR, you can infiltrate a pharmacy and sneak stuff out. This one is a big
no-no if you have any history with the police.

## Importing your drugs across the border

The most obvious of ways to get a large amount of drugs across the
border is by A. Bribing a licensed international truck driver to hide
the drugs in trailer, or B. Place one of your own men behind the seat,
and have him do it for you. The best kind of shipment to smuggle them in
under is either a load that has a strong odor, or food. The strong odor
would hide the smell of most drugs such as the notorious coffee or you
could hid it in food, which will lead the dogs to it, HOWEVER, the
border patrol will most likely still ignore the truck because they will
assume the dogs are being enticed by the food when you declare what you
are crossing. If you aren't able to do either of the above, you can
still just have a mule walk across with your merchandise, or have him
drive it across, WITH U.S. PLATES. If the plates are from Mexico, the
border patrol is more likely to intercept them. If you are walking
across, you can either A. Hide the shit in your backpack along with
school books, assuming your mule is young as most B. Put secret pockets
in your clothing and hide it there or C. Get that shit and hide it in
your shoe, under your balls if male, in your bra if female, up your
pussy or just straight up your a-hole as most do. If you are driving
across however, DO NOT USE THE SAME CAR EVERY TIME. Have two or three
different cars that have been shelled to cross the drugs and switch them
often. If this is your first time, you'll probably be scared shitless. A
good way to not look so damn paranoid like a crack-addict and be relaxed
is to simply think about sex. Trust me, this helps. Do this for the
first couple of times and after that you should be pretty calm about it.

Note: The above is full of shit. Music, to a dog, is a wall of noise,
but to us there's melody and harmony and rythm and a load of different
instruments, masked scents to us are a wall of smell, but to a dog,
there's coffee and pepper and food and whatever other bullshit you use
and drugs. YOU CAN'T HIDE A SCENT FROM A DOG WITH ANOTHER SENT. You can,
however, wrap that shit up in plastic and remove the scent altogether.
The smell WILL seep through, but that'll take time, buy yourself more
time with more plastic and for fucks sake don't use the same gloves you
used to handle the drugs, that'll just smear drugs on the outside of the
plastic, it doesn't matter how little, the dog will smell it, and if you
use your bare hands, you deserve the imminent B& and V&. Also, if the
cop can't find drugs, but doesn't like you and thinks you have drugs he
CAN AND WILL MAKE THE DOG GIVE A FALSE POSITIVE. If he's encouraging the
dog in any way, you're fucked.

## Setting up shop

Obviously, you can't really set up an actual shop but you need to find
places where people with addictions flock. Hit a few nightclubs and see
if you can spot the right crowd. DO NOT carry samplers. Rent out some
storage space and stash your supply here. Then, if you find anyone
wanting to buy, transport the agreed upon amount to a third location
where you exchange it for monies.

## Pricing

Obviously, you can't exactly be reported to the Better Business Bureau.
This doesn't mean that you can go around asking 500 bucks for a vial of
Crack. People simply won't buy that. Before you announce your intentions
to sell, ask potential customers about the going rate as if you wish
them to hook you up. A good rule of thumb is to sell at at least twice
the price you bought it at.

## The competition

You are neither the first nor last to enter this business and that means
competition will be brutal. You can expect the following to work against
you;

* The Mafia
* Small time dealers
* The pimps
* Anyone who has read this article
* The Mexican/Columbian Cartels
* The Mootxican whore cartel

## Profit, the storing thereof

Naturally, you can't keep your hard earned cash stored in physical form,
because you are bound to get jacked at one time or another. Therefor,
you should filter your cash, little by little, into banks. From there
you should move the money to a second bank and from there to one in
Swiss or the Cayman islands, because of their policy of privacy.