## The rules of fighting

1.  Sucker punches are for ~~pussies~~ Anonymous. Most Anon are too
    scrawny to win any other way. There are no prizes for sportsmanship,
    just not getting the shit kicked out of you awards.
2.  Standing on top of your opponent, throwing your arms up into the air
    Platoon-style as you let out a triumphant roar is fucking badass.
3.  Fights are typically to be avoided when possible (i.e. when you feel
    like it)
4.  There are no rules of fighting. Not even the previous three.

With that said, here's the basics of how to avoid getting your shit
ruined.

## Preparation

Before you start opening massive amounts whoop-ass on people, you're
going to need to know a few things before hand.

Most people clench their fists incorrectly. Anyone who's ever taken
boxing will be able to spot this a mile away. The most common mistake is
clenching by putting your thumb into your palm first and then the other
four fingers over it. **THIS IS THE WRONG WAY TO DO IT**. If you punch
someone with your fist like this chances are you're going to hurt, and
even break your thumb. It's also a bad idea because it deprives you of
the ready use of your thumb, which is very often useful when gouging
eyes.

The right way to clench as fist is as follows: Put the fingers into your
palm first, and lock the thumb over them. This means that your thumb can
now no longer be broken if you strike something such as Jimmy Badguys
face.

Your face isn't very sturdy, but the top of your forehead is. Don't be
afraid to pull a Zidane but keep it in reserve. It tends to leave you a
little disoriented if you don't do it right.

On the subject of face punching, don't forget the American classic: the
jaw punch. This is actually quite effective as breaking someones jaw
isn't as hard as it sounds. The best way to accomplish this is by
hitting the side of the jaw at an angle or full on. If you hit it full
on, there's a good chance you'll break both the left and right
attachments but it's going to take some effort. If you hit it sideways
you'll probably only nick one. One side is usually enough, since the jaw
is connected to your skull under your ear, in which your balance is
controlled. This is why people fall down when they get a bad hit to the
jaw. Another good plan is to hit the upper lip. This hurts like hell.

Remember to keep a good stance. Without a proper stance you can get
blown over easy. A wide stance is good. To destabilize your opponent,
kick in their kneecaps. It's super effective, and leaves them open for a
critical hit.

Finally, hitting with your hands is a waste of time. If you're going to
hit someone, or kick them for that matter, put your body behind the
blow. Cocking your hand back is in most cases, a waste of time, when you
can just as easily generate momentum by twisting your upper body with
the blow. Punches should originate from around the waistline.

## Your arsenal

One of the most important rules of fighting is knowing what your arsenal
is, and what it realistically consists of. Generally speaking, it is
divided into 3 categories: **Short Range**, **Medium Range**, and **Long
Range**.

Your **Short Range** weapons (within arms length) consist of pretty much
anything except kicks and most punches. This includes; Headbutts, elbow
strikes, knee strikes, choking, grappling, etc. The only punches that is
really employable in this situation is the wide hook (or the Hockey
punch), however this strike is usually somewhat ineffective so try to
avoid it - and the Uppercut, which is very effective if you get the
space to do it (Chin + Uppercut= KO).

Your **Medium Range** weapons (at or slightly outside arms length)
consist of most punches and short kicks. So basically any kind of punch
(Jabs, Crosses, Hooks, Overhands, etc.) and some kicks (Front Kicks,
Thigh Kicks, etc.).

Your **Long Range** weapons (outside arms length) consist of only Kicks
like the Hook Kicks, Roundhouses, Thigh Kicks, awps, Front Kicks, etc.
This is generally the most difficult group to employ due to the
(generally speaking) need for extensive training to refine and perfect
them.

Before you fight you need to decided what you can realistically use from
each category. That is - not everyone can effectively deliver a Back
Hook Kick or even a Roundhouse, so don't even think about attempting
them because it will only work against you.

## Psychology of a fight

One of the most effective tools of any fighter is their mind. Your mind
will allow you to not only outsmart your opponent, it also allows you to
intimidate your opponent, psyche them out, and alike. Using your
intelligence you can win (or even avoid) a fight before it even begins.
For example, if your about to fight someone who seems to be very relaxed
- this often indicates that they know what they are doing (i.e. They
will kick you shitless) - their obviously relaxation will probably
intimidate you, psyching you out before the fight.

This can work in your favor also, just always remember that no matter
who you are - you will be very nervous before a fight (even Professional
fighters experience this), but if you put on a facade of calm and
relaxation - your opponent can be psyched into thinking you know what
your doing (regardless of what training you may have ever received). If
you do take a martial arts class, make it known to everyone around you -
installing fear and caution into the mind of your opponent (zOMG!!11
Karate), however try not to lie here because you'll look like an idiot
if you do get your ass handed to you.

Also, know as much as possible about your opponent. So find out if they
have ever trained in any martial art, previous fights they have been
involved in, as well as using your personal judgment (as to their combat
abilities). So if your opponent is an experienced striker, take him to
the ground where his advantage isn't as great. Always try to keep
yourself in the best possible situation for yourself.

Another important feature within the mind of a fighter is not to
overestimate your own abilities. So while you may think you're some kind
of super awesome fighter, try to keep your concept of your abilities
realistic, so even if you have been taking Karate lessons for the past
couple of years doesn't make you a good fighter (see McDojo). Avoid
fights you know you will lose at all costs, especially when facing a
situation against multiple opponents (or potential opponents).

## Fist fights

Fist fights-- typically the most common fights that you walk, or crawl,
away from-- can break out for any reason even when both parties involved
are without a trustworthy weapon. As a result, you or your opponent may
be what the D&D nerds call "flat-footed." Basically, when it starts one
of you probably won't be ready to take the punch and is more likely to
get knocked out in one hit. But don't always count on that.

In the event that you're gonna do the Dragon Ball Z standoff routine
beforehand, the very first thing you must do is adopt a combat stance.
Stand with one foot forward and the other back at about shoulder width
(that is that your feet should vertically align with you shoulders),
your feet should never be either directly in front or to the sides of
each other (at any point, even when moving). A general rule is that your
dominant side should be at the back (so if your right handed, stand with
your left foot forward), this allows you to maximize the power of your
most effective side. Turn your body to the side so that your shoulders
are angled at about the same angle as your feet, this helps you to keep
balance (and more importantly protects your junk). You should bend both
legs slightly, tuck your chin in (pull it closer to your chest) and put
your arms at about (your own) head height.

When the actual fight begins, forget every piece of advice and all of
the rules you were ever told about fighting. None of that Kung-Fu shit
usually works when you're in a close-quarters brawl, and chances are
your opponent will block it. Also, never EVER open with a kick to the
head. It's the obvious martial arts drop-out maneuver and you'll end up
on your ass, clutching your testicles in agony, because all the other
guy had to do was step aside and stick his arm out. If you must kick,
kick him in the knee or thigh and completely fuck his ability to walk.
If your opponent tries to roundhouse kick or use any other crazy ninja
shit on you, grab the leg and then pull out the one still on the ground.
If you do that, fight = over.

A good idea might be to use your lower arm to "push" the opponent,
there's a good possibility he'll use both hands to try and grab or block
your arm. This leaves him with no free arms and you with one free arm to
get some free punches in with. If he ends up on the ground for whatever
reason, act fast, lay down and put your weight on his shoulder blade and
bend his arm toward you, this will hurt and if you do it fast and hard
enough may dislocate his shoulder, leaving him with an arm less to fight
you with. Otherwise, fights are usually decided after a few hits, this
is real life not [[animes]]
and the average guy won't be able to stand up straight after a punch or
knee to the solar plexus or sides. If the opponent is larger than you,
don't be careless and rush in wheeling your arms, rather try to sidestep
and dodge as much as you can to wear him out and get him on the rebound,
keep just outside of an arm's length of him and he has to lunge to get
to you, which takes longer to recover from. All the shit on Rocky and in
animes about keeping your feet busy is true, keep walking from side to
side or just in general move your feet, not only does it make it harder
for him to read what you're about to do but it keeps your groin from
staying in the same place for long and he won't be as eager to go for a
groin kick.

Stomach punches and other soft-tissue strikes are preferable to chest or
face punches. They'll hurt more and cause more pain. If you can manage
it, hitting someone in the throat is a good way to wind them, but this
can cause serious injury, which may be unacceptable in some
circumstances. Hitting the solar plexus can cause whoever you are
fighting to lose their breath and stop them up.

In cases where hitting the throat is unacceptable, hitting the diaphragm
is the next best thing. Quite simply put, the diaphragm controls the
contraction and expansion of your lungs. It is located just below your
ribcage. A solid hit here **will** most likely win you the fight because
not only is it a devastating psychological blow when you're gasping for
air, but also because it can take quite some time to recover from.

## Grappling

Most fights come down to this sooner or later. Someone grabs someone
else and both parties go tumbling to the ground in a flailing, screaming
mess. First things first - when grappling, the world is your weapon. Any
hard surface can be used to hurt your opponent very badly. If you want
proof, go bang your elbow into a wall.

Something important when grappling is to be on top. If you can, straddle
him as far up on his torso as possible. However gay it might sound,
being able to slam the other guy's head into the ground over and over
again or pinning one or both of his arms under your knee(s) is a big
advantage.

Pain is also a weapon. It may sound insanely obvious to you, but when
you hurt the other guy, chances are high that he will not be trained
enough to ignore it. Hurt your opponent by twisting fingers, thumbs,
ears, eyes, and noses. If you can actually get a fistful of his hair, by
all means, pull chunks of it out, or better yet, smash him into
something hard (preferably the edge of a wall).

An advantage of grappling is the 90% of martial arts techniques are
completely useless in a grapple, especially things like Tae Kwon Do or
Karate, which mainly teach strikes. Be very careful against people whom
you know practice Judo, Jiujutsu and other grappling techniques, because
they will eat you alive. No shit.

One key point in judo is using leverage and the opponents weight as well
as his bad balance against him to get him to the ground and then
strangle him or whatever, anyone who goes to judo will remember this as
pulling the opponent towards you before a throw and such so you're not
trying to lift a rock over your back but a rock that is moving slightly
and is off-balance. There are some easy ways to get your opponent down,
and preferably out, if you know how to fall straight backwards without
hurting yourself (basically KNOW HOW TO FALL AND NOT FUCK YOURSELF UP)
then you can simply grab the guy around the neck or around/in front of
the chest, position yourself next to him and forcibly fall backwards and
pull him down with you. This will mean he's got to support you while
you're trying to pull him down and himself at the same time, meaning he
will most likely fall straight backwards, and if he doesn't have any
prior experience with falling techniques he will hit the back of his
head on the ground and end up with a concussion or at least be pretty
groggy for a while, but do not do this if you're not confident in your
ability to ignore scraped elbows from the fall and most importantly, if
you don't know how to fall correctly. There are of course the usual neck
swings and such, but they're simple shit so I won't go into them, and
other stuff is complicated.

When you're both on the ground the next course of action is tricky, and
it depends on your opponents position. If he is on his back I'd suggest
laying down (or jumping onto) his chest and quickly wrapping your arm
around his neck, with your other arm holding the first arm in position
if he struggles. Try to put as much of your own weight as possible on
his chest, this combined with strangling (if you got the neck hold
right) is guaranteed to either knock him out in a while or have him
gasping for breath if he manages to get out of the hold. If he's on his
stomach there are way too many cheap ways to hurt him for me to count,
just bash his face into the ground or sit on his back and pull his leg
back.

## Weapons

Two things about using weapons in a fight.

First off - it escalates the danger. Weapons are force multipliers,
meaning that you can hurt someone much worse with a weapon than with
your bare hands (even a rattan stick or bamboo stick can severely fuck
up an unarmed opponent, unless said opponent is really good).

More importantly, using a weapon will probably upgrade the legal
penalties against you by a large factor. I don't live in the US, so I
don't know how much worse assault with a weapon is dealt with compared
to assault without a weapon, but my guess is that it's worse.

With these two principles in mind, here are 2 conclusions.

1.  Avoid using weapons unless you have to.
2.  Make sure the other guy is not armed.

If the other guy is armed, hopefully you're armed as well. If not, I
suggest running. Seriously. Unless you're trained in disarms, in which
case you'll know enough to handle yourself that this entire article is
useless to you.

Anyway, let's assume you're armed, with, I don't know, a stick or
something. Hopefully, you have something like a pool cue or a
broken-down pool cue. This is the most fundamental form of weapon, a
lever, with which you will do one of two things:

1: Hurt your opponent. 
2: Disarm your opponent.

Hurting your opponent should be obvious enough that I need not elaborate
on it, but disarming is slightly trickier. Simply put, **the fastest and
most efficient disarming technique is to hit the other guy on the
fingers of his weapon hand as hard as possible.** This both hurts him
and has a high chance of making him drop his weapon, and you then have a
sizable advantage over him.

Chairs are also a fun sort of improvised weapon. Chairs have 4 legs, and
if you hold the sides properly and twist them around, you can poke,
tangle or simply smash it over his head (not recommended, because chairs
are pretty good shields too). You can pin someone to a wall with a
chair, and then you can smash his trapped head in, grind the side of
your shoe down his calf, or basically take a breather and call for help.

You can even turn a non-rigid object into a decent weapon. A drink in
his face might buy you time to back off and regroup. A jacket can become
a rope or arm protector (not a very good weapon). One nasty trick I read
about in Night Watch was crushing a guy's hand into a handful of broken
glass. Metal wristwatches make very good impromptu knuckledusters.

Speaking of glass, there is a very specific way to break a bottle so
that it A) becomes an effective cutting tool and B) does not fuck your
hand up. Honestly, this takes some practice to get right. If you are in
a bar or at a party or whatever, find yourself a **full** bottle. Take
off the cap, and hold it by the neck at arms length with your bad hand.
Do **not** spill. Hit the open end as hard as you can (without hurting
yourself) with the fleshy part of your palm. If done right, the bottom
of the bottom will blow out. This'll create a *beautiful* stabbing
weapon and will probably be good for slashing too. Don't try this in the
middle of the fight. Do it *before* a fight. But be careful, don't do it
unless you are positive a fight is going to happen. You might be
encouraging a fight by doing this. Always remember, don't do it if your
not sure it won't fuck up your hand.

If you are in a dangerous situation, or have a legitimate reason to be
concerned about attack, a very efficient weapon that you can carry
around without fear of being arrested for carrying said weapon, is a
folding knife. Not a switch blade, but a snap-lock folding knife, the
type you might use to cut boxes open or cut knots. Every
do-it-yourselfer has one of these, and if the blade is less than eight
centimeter's, it's pretty much legal anywhere. At fist glance, it seems
like an incredibly poor choice for a weapon; firearms have range, better
hand-weapons have better range. However, allow me to state the humble
folding knives advantages:

-   Concealable/legality: Supposing you are stopped for some bizarre
    reason, merely mention that you were unpacking boxes, cutting knots,
    or doing some sort of work that required cutting if you live in the
    city; a UPS or similar job is good cover. In the country, this is
    even less than a concern, given that backpackers and hikers, even
    ordinary citizens could conceivably carry such a knife.

-   Ease of use: Most idiots who try to fight with weapons DO NOT KNOW
    HOW TO USE THEM. Let me repeat this: Your opponent is NOT likely to
    know martial arts, hand-to-hand combat, or even how to fire a gun
    correctly... Out of all weapons, a knife is simple and effective. If
    you keep your new friend sharp, she'll serve you well in a variety
    of situations.

-   Wound potential/lethality: It might seem that such a small weapon
    wouldn't be very lethal, but, at close range, the human body is like
    one big vulnerable point. Enough sharp stings to the wrist, and it
    becomes hard for anyone other than iron man to use his hands. A
    couple to the leg or hips, and you will put a man down. One or two
    into the neck, and you have stopped a man from speaking. Anyone
    trying to use a larger weapon in close quarters combat will have to
    aim well to hit anything other than a broad section of the body, but
    you can target to wound, or to kill. This last one = NOT
    RECOMMENDED. For obvious reasons.

Protips:

-   Lexan knuckles are legal in the US.
-   Steel-toe shoes are very effective and also overlooked.
-   You can pass through metal detector stations with both of the above.
-   If you get a folding knife, spend a little money. If you can force
    the blade into folding position without depressing the lock you will
    lose a finger if you stab someone and hit bone.