[[Previous Page|EWFA Chapter 1]]|[[Index|Epic Win For Anonymous]]|[[Next Page|EWFA Chapter 3]]

## Chapter 2 - Discovering 4chan

GROWING UP IN rural Pennsylvania I had little exposure to the outside
world, culturally speaking, except for the piddly local library. My
grandparents bought my sister and I our first family computer, a Compaq
Presario with a blindingly fast Pentium II processor, when I was
fourteen. My ninety-year-old grandfather insisted that familiarity with
a computer would define a person’s ability to compete in the marketplace
of tomorrow, but I had one thing on my mind: How do I get this thing to
play video games?

Up until then, I had owned a few Nintendo consoles. Pop in a game
cartridge and you’re off. There was no installation of software, no
downloading patches. Everything just worked. Not so with this unfamiliar
contraption that miraculously landed in my room (a decision my parents
apparently made without considering the implications of putting what was
essentially a free porn machine in an adolescent boy’s bedroom). Of
course, I was terrified at the prospect of divine retribution and
celestial shame, and I limited my racy searches on that computer to
victorias secret.com, which still brought unimaginable guilt.

Successfully running an average game on a PC in those days often
required hours of detective work. I trawled tech support pages and dug
deeply into hobbyist forums, slowly loading page after page until I had
gathered enough information to get back into the game.

I familiarized myself with dozens of software packages, but I was most
fortunate to grow up along with simple hypertext, the nonlinear,
nonhierarchical structure of ideas all connected across millions of blue
sentence fragments. My search for knowledge and entertainment on the web
felt like untangling a giant knot; at times screen-smashingly
frustrating and at other times deeply satisfying. I would follow certain
paths across twenty pages, come to a dead end, and then start over from
the beginning, following a different path. Over time I became more adept
at finding the fastest routes to the information I wanted, whether that
meant googling various search strings, posting a question on a forum, or
browsing massive downloadable user manuals.

Along the way, I learned basic computer skills. More importantly, I
learned how to navigate the Internet, a skill that would come to define
my career. Due to the way information is structured on the web, one can
follow endless rabbit holes of information. This was the dawn of the
search engine and Wikipedia, which together opened my mind to an
infinite world of new questions and answers. At some point gaming became
a secondary concern, and I started using the Internet for the Internet’s
sake.

Though my mother put strict limits on the amount of time I could spend
on the Internet, I had an hour each day to chat with friends on AOL
Instant Messenger, read video game news, and look at funny photos at
places like Fark and Something Awful. I’d boot up the computer, dial up
a connection, and open twenty windows. Then I’d putz around the house,
waiting for everything to load (usually about ten minutes). Then, and
only then, would I start the egg timer that my mom used to mark our
Computer Time. The twenty windows would generally keep me occupied for
the hour.

Over the next few years I discovered Napster, which opened my ears to
indie rock. I became obsessed with punk music and its associated
aesthetic. During those years I read probably thousands of music reviews
and participated in countless forum arguments over the authenticity of
certain bands. I got turned onto indie game development and the software
piracy scene. I engaged in conversations about the nature of art, pop
culture, and the web itself. I felt as though I was a part of something
to which literally no one I knew in real life was privy. At home, amid
miles of cornfields, I had one neighbor (a middle-aged couple), but
online I was a part of a cadre of critics and tastemakers on the
bleeding edge of culture. (Looking back, I was probably pretty
insufferable in those days.)

And then college happened. I went to a tiny liberal arts school a few
miles from my hometown. Culturally speaking, it didn’t have much more to
offer, but I fell in with a small group of indie rock geeks. We were
aesthetes, silently projecting an aura of cultural superiority over the
normals, who likely never noticed.

One of my friends shared my enthusiasm for the web, though his knowledge
of its emerging trends dwarfed mine. He was the sort of guy who wore a
fedora, started a satirical newspaper, and had dreams of developing a
gossip site that would act as sort of a hyperlocal Gawker for our
rinky-dink campus. Perhaps more than our shared love of the web, we had
in common a basic desire to be a part of a world bigger than the one in
which our bodies were trapped. We’d talk about New York business moguls
and Silicon Valley upstarts, referring to industry personalities by
first names though we were miles away (geographically and
experientially) from either of those scenes.

This friend and I developed a habit for sending each other, via instant
messenger, links to funny or interesting web content. It became a
challenge to beat each other to the latest story, and since we were
pretty much the only people we knew who spent most of their waking hours
in front of a computer, this practice continued after college. To this
day, we still IM each other stuff.

Sometime in 2006, this guy sent me a link to 4chan—to a gross-out photo
of an anime (Japanese animation) character doing something unspeakable
involving at least three bodily fluids. For us, the Internet was a
magical ladder reaching to new heights of the human imagination, but it
was also a hilarious cesspool of depravity.

“Dude, WTF,” was probably my response, incredulity giving way to
laughter at the existence of the kind of mind who would create such an
atrocity. “Where did you find this?”

“4chan.org. It’s a gold mine.”

And so began my relationship with 4chan. My friend went on to write, in
a blog post for Gawker, one of the first mainstream reports of 4chan as
a growing phenomenon.

4chan users would likely call me a newfag (read on, offended readers)
and a lurker. I’ve rarely ever posted anything on the site, and I came
to the scene relatively late. But what I found on 4chan was a
distillation of what made the web so special. It’s wild and weird—a
level playing field where physicists and fathers rub shoulders with
horny teenagers and senior citizens who compulsively collect their belly
button lint in mason jars, with photographic proof. To be honest, I
often find the place generally repulsive, but sometimes repulsive things
have massive influence.

On 4chan, you never quite know whom or what you’re going to run into.
4chan is like that burnout teenager who asked you and your childhood
friends if y’all wanted to see a dead body down by the train tracks.
4chan is that kid in your class with Asperger’s who sketched out a
hundred-page graphic novel based on the entire recorded output of the
prog-metal band Rush. It’s the lightheartedly sadistic next-door bully
named Sid from Pixar’s Toy Story. It’s Brad Pitt’s Tyler Durden from
Fight Club. It’s Willy Wonka and Boo Radley and Johnny Knoxville all
rolled into one throbbing, sweating, oozing gob of id.

4chan is the most fascinating place on the Internet.

## But What Is It?

4chan is an imageboard: a simple message board that allows users to post
images in addition to text. Users can post anonymously, without setting
up an account. It’s hosted at http://www.4chan.org, and was launched in
2003 by a 15-year-old kid who wanted to provide his online buddies with
a place to share anime.

That’s it.

But somehow, 4chan has evolved into the web’s foremost wellspring of
pop-culture output over the last decade, spawning globally recognized
iconography and serving as a base for people who conduct clandestine
operations ranging from stalking cute girls to organizing global efforts
of pseudopolitical “hacktivism.”

As of this writing, 4chan receives 12 million hits monthly, making it
one of the largest communities on the web. No small feat for a site with
no marketing budget, no stated mission, no searchable index, no
archives, a userbase that’s famously antagonistic to outsiders, a
decade-old user interface, and almost zero static content. There’s
something special about 4chan that keeps people coming back, in
dramatically greater numbers year after year.

“Like it or hate it, 4chan is an important cultural force . . . It is a
huge site, and so many Internet memes are formed there, it’s hard to
ignore it,” said June Cohen, executive producer of TED Media, the
organization that invited 4chan’s founder to speak alongside
impressively credentialed academics, inventors, and entrepreneurs in
2010.

I could go on telling you about it, but I’d rather show you.

* * *

[[Previous Page|EWFA Chapter 1]]|[[Index|Epic Win For Anonymous]]|[[Next Page|EWFA Chapter 3]]