[[Previous Page|EWFA Chapter 6]]|[[Index|Epic Win For Anonymous]]|[[Next Page|EWFA Chapter 8]]

## Chapter 7 - The Meme Life Cycle

THROUGHOUT 2010 I wrote for an Internet culture blog called Urlesque.
Our stated goal was to “uncover bits of the web.” We reported most memes
that came along, but for me the most interesting assignments allowed me
to cover the way memes spread. How exactly does a no-name tween become
an overnight celebrity, sharing iTunes chart space with global pop
superstars like Ke$ha and Rihanna? How are people able to find out about
memes? Why does one girl’s tearful reaction to the Twilight trailer beat
out a professionally produced viral campaign with a budget of millions?
At this point we know what memes are, but where do they come from? How
do they spread? The first step in answering these questions is an
understanding of the Meme Life Cycle.

The following cycle is loosely defined. Memes don’t always follow this
pattern in this order, nor does their rise to mainstream exposure always
include all eight of these steps, but it’s a useful template.

#### Birth

Internet memes are born when the original source material is initially
uploaded anywhere on the Internet. Fertile meme territory can be found
all over the web, especially on community sites that encourage content
uploading like YouTube, DeviantArt, or Facebook, but also on remote
locations like personal webpages.

It could be a video of a guy riding a dirt bike into a railing, a
hilariously comprehensive treatise on an obscure cartoon, a clever
Photoshopped image, or video of a tween girl having a public emotional
breakdown. Once a potential meme is on the web, it may sit idle for
months or even years until it is discovered, likely by the meme curators
at 4chan.

#### Discovery

Someone posts the item to 4chan, usually accompanied by a comment like,
“Holy crap, you guys,” or “WTF” (or OMG or LOL or rage or any number of
strong emotions). If it’s a good meme, the conversation thread explodes.
Hundreds of people add their commentary. The meme spreads to other
threads.

If it’s an image, we’ll see parodic Photoshops and image macros. If it’s
video, we’ll likely encounter mashups and YouTube Poop, a game in which
users deconstruct and piece together video footage for psychedelic or
absurdist effect. If it’s audio, memes are remixed, chopped, screwed,
mashed up. Even simple text memes, like creepy stories or hilarious
personal experiences, will be retrofitted into a series of copypasta
templates.

Before long, we can’t scroll through /b/ without being inundated by the
meme.

#### Aggregation

At some point, the meme jumps from 4chan to the broader Internet. This
usually happens when someone posts the meme to a content aggregator like
Reddit or Digg. These sites allow memes to flourish beyond the niche
world of 4chan. They collect news stories, photos, videos—any piece of
content—by allowing their communities of users to post whatever they
want. When someone posts content to an aggregator, other users have the
ability to upvote or digg it. As users promote content by the simple
power of their approval, the most widely approved content rises to the
top, or rather the front page, exposing it to a much wider audience.

#### Word of Mouth

Once memes reach the front page of an aggregator like Reddit, it takes
no more than a few hours for people to start tweeting and blogging about
the meme. Internet savvy types send links to their friends via instant
message. The meme may begin to trend on Twitter or pop up on Google
Trends, a list of frequently googled search terms.

#### Blog Pickup

This is typically when the Internet culture blogs discover the story.
Sites like Buzzfeed, Know Your Meme, The Daily What, Videogum, or any
members of the Cheezburger Network, will pick up the meme and attempt to
add context. Where did it come from? Why is it funny? Can we get an
interview with any involved parties? These are the sorts of “value-add”
propositions that blogs will try to score before their competitors. It’s
a race to get the most information before the meme explodes into the
mainstream. The most comprehensive overview will often get the most
links from mainstream media.

By this time the meme is being rehashed, as everyone wants to get in on
the thing before it goes stale. Self-referential jokes and clever
mutations of the meme abound on places like 4chan and Tumblr. Everyone
on the Internet is able to enjoy the meme until . . .

#### Mainstream Exposure

There are two ways mainstream media tends to approach memes. If the meme
contains anything negative or shocking, as memes often do, we see
breathless nightly news exposés and daytime talk-show hosts bemoaning
the State of Things.

If the meme skews toward the lighthearted or quirky, we see late-night
talk-show bits or stars of popular memes guesting on morning radio
shows. “Look at this wacky thing from the Internet,” we hear. “What a
world.”

#### Commercialization

Only the biggest meme stars will ever see any money, whether it’s
through corporate sponsorship or by selling meme-related merchandise.
Microsoft hired Paul Vasquez, star of the Double Rainbow meme, to
promote the Windows Live Photo Gallery software in a TV ad. Adah Bahner
of Chocolate Rain fame shilled for Dr. Pepper, Firefox, Sony, Vizio, and
more. Internet memes provide advertisers a roster of recognizable but
reasonably priced spokespeople who are keen to translate their fifteen
minutes of fame into some quick cash before their meme dies.

#### Death

Memes never truly die, but one could argue that it’s time to move on
when your hopelessly unhip mom or dad asks “Hey, did you see that thing
on YouTube about that guy who punched out another guy on the subway?” No
more remixes or Photoshops or fervent discussion threads. The meme is
over, for now, as every bit of fascination is drained by unimaginative
rehashes and abundant mainstream coverage. Particularly powerful memes
are subsumed into the memesphere, to be resurrected as callbacks or
mashed up with newer memes as comedic references.

### A Tale of Two Memes

Let’s chart the meme life cycle with two examples, both of which
occurred in the summer of 2010. They weren’t the biggest memes of the
season, but they represent the two ways memes are generally consumed by
the mainstream: hand-wringing sensationalism and lighthearted amusement.

### Consequences Will Never Be The Same

In July 2010, an 11-year-old girl using the pseudonym Jessi Slaughter
became embroiled in a microcontroversy on the streaming video site
Stickam, where users accused her of engaging in a sexual relationship
with a 20-something member of the scene band “Blood on the Dancefloor.”

#### Birth: Jessi Slaughter Uploads Meme-worthy Content

Slaughter uploaded a response video to YouTube, in which she threatened
those who taunted her online. Here’s a taste of what she said:

> Hey YouTube it’s Jessi Slaughter here and this is to all you fucking
> haters. OK guess what? You guys are bitches. You know what? You don’t
> phase [sic] me. I’m just doing this just so you can tell I read the
> comments. I read the messages and I replied to them, but know what? I
> don’t give a fuck. I’m happy with my life, OK? And if you can’t like
> realize that and stop hating you know what I’ll pop a glock in your
> mouth and make a brain slushie, OK? Cause you hater bitches—you’re
> just, like, jealous of me. You’re just saying that because you’re
> jealous of me because I’m more pretty than you, I have more friends,
> more people like me, I have more fans . . . Um yeah, and all that
> shit.

The dialogue makes the girl sound like a hardened street urchin, but in
the footage she comes off as a typically self-conscious little girl
reeling off catchphrases she’s picked up on TV.

Nonetheless, I couldn’t conceive a video that would be more tailor-made
to ignite the ire of 4chan. Here was an 11-year-old white girl taking on
the thuggish bravado found between songs on gangsta rap albums. She was
out of her element. On her Tumblr blog she claimed, “I can’t be tamed.”
Plenty of people wanted to prove her wrong.

#### Discovery: 4chan Pounces

It wasn’t long before the 4chan hivemind targeted Slaughter. Her
unmitigated haughtiness and filthy mouth were perfect bait for /b/tards
who would relish turning her life into a living hell for a while. Her
video was posted in “You Rage You Lose” threads, which consist of people
sharing how long they were able to last before they exploded into a rage
while watching the video in question. The girl’s complete lack of
self-awareness drove 4chan into a frenzy. In their eyes, she needed to
be put in her place. Since her parents clearly had no control over their
daughter, it was time for Anonymous to carry out some vigilante justice.

They bombarded her social networking profiles with hateful comments,
urging her to kill herself. They also sent pizza deliveries to her house
and left threatening messages on her parents’ answering machine.

A large measure of deindividuation—also known as mob mentality—occurs in
many 4chan raids. Everything happens quickly, and the rush to be the guy
that’s able to score the dox (4chan slang for personal information like
home address and phone number) is heady. When all was said and done,
even some /b/tards claimed that they thought Anonymous had gone too far.
At no point did the attackers stop to think, “Am I really antagonizing
an 11-year-old girl? What kind of human garbage am I?”

Slaughter posted a follow-up video which rocketed the story into meme
history. Teary-eyed and hysterical, Jessi Slaughter begged her attackers
to stop. While this would have been enough to solidify meme status, her
father provided troll bait of an unparalleled variety.

> I’m gonna tell you right now. This is from her father! You’re a bunch
> of lying, no good punks. And I know who it’s coming from. Because I
> backtraced it. And I know who’s emailing and who’s doing it, and
> you’ve been reported to the cyber police and the state police. You
> better write one more thing or screw with my computer again, you’ll be
> arrested! End of conversation! From her father! And if you come near
> my daughter, guess what? Consequences will never be the same. Ya lyin’
> bunch of pricks!

Slaughter’s powerless father’s empty threats, coupled with his obviously
poor grasp on how the Internet works, gave 4chan trolls enough material
to construct hundreds of image macros, video remixes, and more. The term
“backtrace” has become a common ironic reference to one’s inability to
track the online activity of hackers and trolls. Similarly,
“consequences will never be the same” has become a favorite closing for
troll threats.

Due to the sordid nature of the controversy, this meme bypassed the
Aggregation stage, as aggregation sites like Reddit and Digg tend to shy
away from bullying like this. They’re generally made up of friendly,
positive folks, or at least people who play nice in order to maintain a
reputation in the community. A lot of Redditors are also /b/tards. The
community shapes the discourse.

#### Word of Mouth: “Check out this bratty little girl and her dumb redneck
dad.”

While it’s difficult to document this sort of thing, one can easily
imagine 4chan users instant messaging the video to their friends. I mean
. . . I did!

#### Blog Pickup: Gawker and Urlesque Break The Story

Bloggers, on the other hand, had an opportunity to write hundreds of
think pieces about the risks of cyberbullying and unsettling teenage
Stickam subculture.

At Gawker, Adrian Chen wrote:

> Don’t pick on 11 year-old girls. Seriously. No matter how dumb they
> seem—no matter how much they might seem to deserve it—they are, at the
> end of the day, 11 year-old girls. You wouldn’t make an 11 year-old
> girl cry in real life; why do it on the Internet?

Cyberbullying is a constant. No amount of handwringing is going to
change that, because it’s nearly impossible to prosecute. Of course no
one should be mean to 11-year-olds. But haters, as they say, gonna hate.
The problem is more likely to be solved by empowering potential victims
with knowledge of the realities of cyberbullying than by expecting
anonymous sociopaths to be nice. Slaughter’s parents gave the impression
in multiple interviews that they had little understanding of what she
was up to online, and furthermore seemed unable to enforce appropriate
disciplinary measures.

I wrote as much in a blog post for Urlesque at the time. From there, the
story was dissected by countless mainstream news sites.

#### Mainstream Exposure: Innocent Girl Cyberbullied, are Your Children Safe?
Stay Tuned to Find Out.

It only took a few days before Slaughter and her parents were brought on
morning shows to talk about their experience. Child safety experts
descended onto the scene to dispense advice that ranged from “ban the
computer forever” to “let your kid make mistakes.”

This meme skipped the Commercialization stage, for obvious reasons.

#### Death: The Hivemind Moves On

For the most part, Jessi Slaughter has since stayed off the Internet
(her father was later arrested for child abuse when he punched his
daughter in the face), and as usual, trolls got bored and lost interest.
While the jargon inspired by this meme will live forever, the Photoshops
and remixes have mostly dried up.

### Operation Birthday Boy

4chan may be well known for causing turmoil on and off the web, but deep
down it has a heart. As much as /b/tards love to bring down the
arrogant, they take pride in standing up for the little guy. Consider
the story of William Lashua, a 90-year-old WWII vet from Massachusetts.

#### Birth: Look At This Poor Guy :(

In August 2010, someone posted an image to 4chan featuring a photo of a
flyer found at a grocery store. The flyer featured an elderly man with
kind eyes and a grumpy frown. It read, “Wanted: People for Birthday
Party,” and provided the time and location for the event.

#### Discovery: D’awww!

4chan’s heart melted. They assumed that this poor guy was so lonely and
friendless that he had to make signs advertising his own birthday party.
Within hours, they decided to give him a birthday surprise. They tracked
down his military record and contacted the VFW where the party was set
to be held, not so they could harass him but to throw him the best party
ever.

#### Aggregation: Reddit Starts Its Charity Engine

When someone posted the plan to the social news site Reddit, the thing
exploded. As it turned out, William Lashua’s grandson is a Reddit user.
When he posted the following message to Reddit, it only fueled the
effort to make Lashua’s birthday special.

> Kind folks of reddit, My family and I appreciate the outpouring of
> love and generosity. There has been a large misunderstanding. The
> poster which I’m told was found at the Gardner Stop & Shop was more a
> local notice for people that know him. It was in no way to indicate
> that he is alone. He has 7 children, many grandchildren, and even
> great grandchildren. In his younger years he was a foster parent to
> dozens of foster children. He is well liked in the community, and will
> be fully supported on his 90th birthday

> Thank you again for all the love and well wishes, we certainly never
> expected this.

#### Word of Mouth: “Check out this adorable old geezer.”

The story spread to personal blogs and Twitter accounts. People posted
photos of gifts and cards they planned to send. One guy who worked at a
beef jerky company uploaded photos of his planned gift to the obviously
toothless Lashua: a full case of dried meat. A Facebook group, which
peaked at nearly seven thousand members, was created for people to share
birthday wishes and collaborate on gift ideas. Lashua’s image was
Photoshopped and mashed up with dozens of other memes and meme
templates.

#### Blog Pickup: The Daily What and Urlesque pick up the story

The heartwarming tale was an opportunity for small media outlets to
feature the kinder side of the web’s underbelly.

#### Mainstream Exposure: Internet Wishes Area Man Happy 90th Birthday

A local news station interviewed the Lashua family and the story ran on
a few prominent news websites.

#### Death: 4chan Pats Itself on the Back

Reddit took images from the birthday party and 4chan users and
subsequently shared with the community. According to one anonymous
poster who contacted the American Legion, Lashua received fifty bouquets
of flowers, twenty cakes, and five UPS trucks bearing cards.

### Bottoms Up

Whether 4chan is an Internet Hate Machine or a place where people can
collaborate on positive projects, no matter how misdirected, the
exciting thing here is the way that information is now being discovered,
disseminated, and consumed online. Creatives and tastemakers are no
longer trying to shoehorn the web into their existing media channels,
but are embracing it as a new source—the new source—of popular culture.
People are creating their own fun, their own characters. They are
engaged in a vibrant participatory culture with no rules or boundaries.

We’ve all heard statistics about how people are spending less time
watching TV, listening to the radio, and going to the movies, and how
that time is now spent on the Internet. This is why.

In the time it took you to read this chapter, thousands of new threads
were started on 4chan. Hundreds of new posts went up on Reddit, Tumblr,
and Twitter. Dozens of stories were picked up by culture blogs, and a
few made it all the way to global news sites or even TV. A single photo,
song, video, or story has gone viral, exposed to millions. Marketing
agencies who understand this process are among the few pioneers who
recognize that they no longer possess the tools to drive culture—culture
which no longer trickles down from above, but grows up and spreads
laterally from below. This is why Stephen Colbert and Old Spice reach
out directly to Reddit and even 4chan, respectively.

### Welcome to the Memesphere

Once cultural artifacts go viral, they are subsumed into the lexicon to
serve as the foundation for comedic callbacks, mashups, Photoshops, etc.
The culture becomes so self-referential as to become virtually
incomprehensible to those who do not live inside it. Think about your
grandparents, and how your daily conversation about SMS texting and
email wouldn’t make much sense to them. That gap between those who are
“in” and those who are “out” widens at a staggering acceleration, to the
point where I might come back to the web from a short vacation and have
trouble understanding what’s going on. As the memesphere grows, it
demands more of your attention.

This is largely because information isn’t arranged linearly online. It’s
more like a complex network of rabbit holes which may or may not yield
the information you’re looking for. If you’re looking for information,
you do a Google search. But maybe you don’t know what exactly to search
for. So you try Wikipedia with a few different search terms.

You find that in order to gain a basic understanding of X, you must
first learn about Y and Z. But then, in order to understand Z, you’ll
need to watch a YouTube video, check out a forum thread, and visit
someone’s Twitter account. You must probe many pathways, bouncing from
one resource to the next and back, hunting for puzzle pieces. It’s a
skill that only today’s younger generation is equipped to grasp, because
we’ve grown up with the acceleration of consumer technology. It’s an
active, participatory quest for understanding. It’s becoming second
nature.

Today, this is the way humans learn, laugh, build, argue, discover,
share, and live.

### Surviving and Thriving in the Memesphere

One question I get more than almost any other in my line of work is,
“How do you make something popular online?” The wording of this question
belies a fundamental misunderstanding of how the web works, especially
considering that it’s usually asked by people who spend a lot of time
online.

What made Rick Astley’s “Never Gonna Give You Up” go viral, two decades
after its release? This question is impossible to answer, because the
song’s viral success was based on several serendipitous events.
Advertisers in particular want to be able to buy this kind of success,
but there’s no way a social media marketer would be able to mastermind a
coup like this. It could only have happened by chance. Sometimes it just
comes down to blind luck: slow news day, bad weather, a randomly placed
4chan thread.

Like pop songs, memes that behave like empty vessels are often the most
successful. I’ve seen some memes plastered with several different
languages. But sometimes the most obscure, unapproachable memes win out
in the end because of increased enthusiasm from a small group of fans.

If there’s anything 4chan users hate (along with the rest of the
Internet), it’s a forced meme, which someone, whether a wannabe
Photoshop artiste or a grassroots marketing consultant, is desperately
trying to make viral. While some companies have managed to pull off
viral success, forced memes are most often met with yawns, if not
outright contempt.

### A Meme is Born: The Story of Keyboard Cat

Imagine creating some bit of entertainment and putting it up on YouTube
for your friends, only to watch it become a massive global sensation.
That’s what happened to Brad O’Farrell when he posted footage of a cat
playing a keyboard.

O’Farrell has spent time on Internet forums for years, originally going
online so he could talk about video games. This was way before people
“just got online to make social media profiles.” O’Farrell says that his
early Internet experiences gave him thick skin. But he still gives
anonymous a wide berth:

> I’m actually kind of terrified of the Internet because of my tragic
> past on message boards, I’m always afraid doing an interview about
> keyboard cat will make me sound like a douche and make me a target of
> 4chan.

O’Farrell had a group of online pals that all followed each other’s
YouTube channels. The vloggers would make jokey little videos, but
O’Farrell didn’t seem to find his voice on camera, so he began using his
channel to make mashups and other meme-ish creations.

At that time, O’Farrell’s network of vlogger friends were making parody
videos, sometimes of popular YouTube or Hollywood stars, or of one
another. O’Farrell wanted to create content that would give his buddies
something to parody, but he had no intention of creating a meme.

O’Farrell stumbled on a 30-year-old video of a cat “playing” a short
tune on a keyboard (the cat was being manipulated by its owner, Charlie
Schmidt). He thought it was funny in itself, but he came up with the
idea of pasting the video at the end of fail videos, e.g., videos of
people falling down or messing up or otherwise making an ass of
themselves. He titled it, “Play Him Off, Keyboard Cat,” referring to the
vaudevillian practice of a musician starting to play to cue a flailing
performer that it was time to exit the stage.

> The original title, “Play Him Off, Keyboard Cat” is sort of like mad
> libs. I renamed the cat “Keyboard Cat” (it was originally “Cool Cat”)
> because it was more specific and evoked a character like “Pedobear,”
> whereas Cool Cat could be referring to any cat. The “Him” part is an
> easily changeable template, for whoever the subject is of the parody.
> I was intending to make more follow up videos myself, so I was mostly
> just setting up a naming convention for a series of videos, but other
> people made them before I got around to it.

First he noticed that people were using his template to “play off” other
videos. Then he noticed they were being posted on various forums, and
realized that YouTube commenters were referencing other memes. That’s
when he knew that the sort of people who spend time playing around with
memes were beginning to appreciate the video. At the time, O’Farrell was
working for a web video company, who tasked him with promoting their
content on YouTube. He often pitched YouTube directly at
editor@youtube.com. This time he sent in Keyboard Cat with his usual
suggestions, and the video was granted feature placement. From there it
took off, spreading to 4chan and other meme-oriented sites.

> I thought maybe it would be a blip on the radar, one of those things
> like “hey look someone made the Mona Lisa out of Legos and it was on
> Boing Boing for a day”, but the fact keyboard cat became elevated into
> the ‘meme canon’ surprised me. Even though a keyboard cat video alone
> isn’t enough to make it onto big blogs these days, the character of
> Keyboard Cat itself is sort of permanently in the Internet
> consciousness. It’s like how a satellite is launched into space with a
> rocket and then it detaches and is self-sustaining, the “Play him off”
> part was the rocket that got the “Keyboard Cat” character into the
> zeitgeist.

At this point, the video was getting enough attention that O’Farrell
decided to attach ads. But he was worried that Charlie Schmidt might
come out of the woodwork and want a piece of the pie or throw a DMCA
(Digital Millennium Copyright Act) takedown notice at him. So O’Farrell
tracked down Schmidt and explained the benefit of keeping the parodies
online. Schmidt agreed, and now he’s selling T-shirts, an iPhone app,
and even a collection of Keyboard Cat’s Greatest Hits—not to mention the
TV commercials (Wonderful Pistachios used Keyboard Cat alongside Snooki,
Chad Ocho Cinco, Rod Blagojevich, and characters from Peanuts, among
other pop-culture heavyweights). Currently, more than four thousand
different YouTube videos feature Keyboard Cat.

O’Farrell agrees there’s no way to guarantee that something will go
viral, but there are ways to help it along, like putting it in a
familiar format; making it easy to parody with basic software; and
pitching well to editors and bloggers—but only if the content has legs
and clear legal rights.

So this is 4chan’s lighter side that has bled out into the rest of the
web. Participatory culture, meme creation, viral media: whatever you
want to call it, we’re experiencing something new and exciting, and
4chan is at its forefront.

And yet 4chan is not just creativity. It’s also creative destruction.
We’ve already seen how anonymous trolls tried to ruin Jessi Slaughter’s
life. What would happen if they went after global corporations or
political candidates of the highest order?

What happens when a toddler gets bored building sandcastles? He totters
over to the next kid’s creation and obliterates it with one unexpected
kick.

* * *

[[Previous Page|EWFA Chapter 6]]|[[Index|Epic Win For Anonymous]]|[[Next Page|EWFA Chapter 8]]